# Logging onto a cloud instance
Prerequisites:
- SSH client ([Git bash](https://msysgit.github.io/) for Windows)
- Knowledge about cyberinfrastructure
- Access to a cloud instance (in the form of a IP address)

Objectives:
- Obtain the permission to access your cloud instance
- Get the "address" of your cloud instance
- Log in to your cloud instance

## Obtaining your own cloud instance address
Your instructors will provide you with a unique IP address which is the id of the virtual machine istance running in the cloud. An example of a public IP is: 145.100.59.76. This address is obtained by configuring and instanciating a virtual machine on the Sara infrastructure. The [Sara](https://surfsara.nl/) infrastructure is the national scientific cloud service in the Netherlands. Other European countries have different services and technologies. In this lesson, we will go through the necessary steps to connect to the virtual machine and start playing around with it.

## Logging into your cloud instance
The first step is getting the IP address of the machine to connect to and user credentials to use. The instructor will provide you with the adequate informations. Once you retrieved the IP address, use the ssh program to establish the connection:

```bash
$ ssh username@123.456.1.1
```

(Note that logging in is often a bit more complex for security reasons).

## First steps
Once the connection is open you can get the name of the machine you are connected to, your username, current directory and other useful informations by typing
- `hostname` which will return the name of the machine you are connected to.
- `whoami` which will return the name your current username.
- `pwd` which will print the path to your current directory.
- `du -sh` which will print the disk usage of the current folder and everything below it
- `df -h` which will print the free space on the available disks

## Last step
Once you are done with the remote session, you can close the connection by typing:

```bash
$ exit
```
