# Move data onto your instance

Once you have opened a connection to the remote host you can start your analysis. First of all you need to get the data (being sure you have enough space in your home folder).

## Disk usage and free space

As mentioned in the previous lesson, the `du` and `df` utilities are useful in disk usage analysis. The `du` utility gives informations about the occupied disk space, while the `df` gives informations on the free space on the current disk. Useful options to remember when running the `du` utility are `-h` and `-s`, they makes the output human readable while summarizing. If you need a more detailed output you can run the same command without the `-s` flag and the tool will return a list with the size of all the files in the current folder. To access the size of your home folder you can run:

```bash
$ du -sh
```

The `df` tool, on the other hand, gives you information about the free space on your disk. Again, the `-h` flag makes the output human readable. So, to check how much free space is in your machine just type:

```bash
$ df -h
```

Make sure you have at least 1G of free space in your home folder.

## Download the data

You can download the data as follows:

```
$ cd         # make sure you are in your own home directory
$ wget http://www.hpa-bioinformatics.org.uk/lgp/resource/Sample280.fastq.gz
```
In this case, you are using a command line tool, `wget`, to download content from a web server. This command supports downloading files from FTP and HTTP(s).  The tool `wget` also supports recursive download (with the `-r` flag), allowing you to download  complete folders and their contents.  For your information, there are other command line tools that can also be used to download data (e.g., `curl`,`rsync`), but `wget` should serve you well for the current lesson and other bioinformatics analyses. Programs like `wget` can be run 'in the background' (e.g. as a batch job), which is needed for really large transfers.

## Copying files between your local computer and your virtual machine instance

You often have transfer files between your local computer and the virtual machine instance. The 'command line way' to do this is to use `scp`, which is very similar to the Unix `cp`. To recall, 

<pre>   
        $ cp <em>file1 [ file2 ... ] destination</em>
</pre>

This copies *file1* (etc) to *destination*. If *destination* is a folder, a new copy of *file1* (etc.) will be created in it. If *destination* is not a folder, *destination* will become a copy of *file1* (and will be overwritten if it already existed).

<pre>   
        $ scp <em>file(s) destination</em>
</pre>


With `scp`, both the <em>file(s)</em> and the <em>destination</em> can be remote. A remote file specification looks like

<pre>
<em>user@hostname:path</em>
</pre>

Here, `user` is your login name at the remote machine. `hostname` is can be something like `login.op.umuctrecht.nl`, but with cloud computing, it more often looks like dotted numbers, e.g. `145.100.50.76`. `path` is 'route' to the file (or folder), relative to the users home directory. A few examples:

### Copying files from your local machine to the remote (virtual) machine:

```
scp Sample280.fastq.gz jmsith@145.100.50.76:~/mydata.fastq.gz
```

This copies the local file Sample280_fastqc.zip to user `jmsith`'s home directory (indicated by `~`), at the same time giving it another name, namely `mydata.fastq.gz`. The first time you contact the remote machine, it will show message like this:

```
The authenticity of host '86.50.169.208 (86.50.169.208)' can't be established.
ECDSA key fingerprint is 5e:d6:1e:42:3c:0b:85:b2:34:07:c4:aa:3f:1c:c7:40.
Are you sure you want to continue connecting (yes/no)?
```

Simply type yes and 'Enter'. You will now be asked for a password, and after entering it, the transfer will take place. (Depending on the security set-up, `scp` may look a bit different).

Another example:


```
scp Sample280.fastq.gz jmsith@145.100.50.76:~/
```

This is like the previous example, but now the 'path' (namely, '~/') is just a folder ('~/' means: the users home directory). This means that Sample280.fastq.gz will be copied to the virtual machine under its own name.

```
scp Sample280.fastq.gz jmsith@145.100.50.76:~/data/
```

This time, file `Sample280.fastq.gz` will be copied to folder `data`, located inside the users home directory. (This folder must already exist before the copying).


```
scp Sample280.fastq.gz jmsith@145.100.50.76:/data/shared/gen/jsmith/data
```

Here, file `Sample280.fastq.gz` is copied to a different file system, namely `/data/shared/gen/jsmith/data`.

Lastly, it is also possible  to transfer several files in one go, using wildcards:

```
scp Sample*.fastq.gz jmsith@145.100.50.76:~/
```

This will copy all files whose name starts with `Sample` and end in `.fastq.gz to the remote machinen.


### Copying files from remotely to locally (aka downloading)

This is not so different:



## Graphical user interface for transferring files

There are also graphical user interfaces for doing the remote transfers, for instance [WinSCP](http://winscp.net/eng/index.php) or [FileZilla](https://filezilla-project.org/). They can be convenient, but they cannot run as a batch job (while you log out in the mean time). This can be a drawback when transferring really large files.
